[Music]
the composition of the liquid has
changed it doesn't have any properties
of water
[Music]
left is very
important
[Music]
water
crime the yamuna river in North India
begins high up in the Himalayas and
teams with life for hundreds of
kilometers in the Indian capital of
Delhi it undergoes an astonishing
transformation this is the vad V this is
the yamuna enter up to this point into
the de on that side water is clean
before barage water come from the
Himalaya region origin of the Yuna
point so it's clean 400 km and then 400
km and then the next 22 km onwards it
becomes okay okay okay okay basically
this is the same water okay before the
viras and after the
vas am is basically killed by the human
activities in this water heavy metals
toxic Metals pesticide all are
[Music]
present oxygen levels in parts of the
river are zero no animal life can be
sustained but human life on the river
continues
[Music]
planting crops along the yina was banned
by India's Supreme Court they feared the
food supply might be
tainted but the law is barely enforced
and every day thousands of kilograms of
vegetables grown in yum in a water find
their way into delhi's homes and
[Music]
restaurants it's hard to see the state
of the Aro today is anything but a
tragedy but some make the best of it
people like sakander have been working
off this River for 30 years he scours
this whole section looking for trash and
he earns maybe 5 or 10 Rupees for each
piece he says he can make up to 5,000
rupees every month and that for him the
state of the river right now it's not
such a bad
thing
for
[Applause]
[Music]
Hindus consider the yam to be a goddess
once a year tens of thousands of
pilgrims gather on its banks in the
towns of matura and brindavan to pray
and immerse themselves in the water
believing it brings them good health and
[Applause]
[Music]
prosperity
we're outside a assari dying Factory
near matura one of the towns that lines
the am River it isn't just sewage that's
pumped into the river every day it's
also a lot of industrial uh effluent in
this case uh chemicals a byproduct of
the SAR dying process as you can see
it's flowing pretty freely into local
drains from here it'll make its way into
the am and onto people's food and water
supplies eventually someone will be
drinking
[Music]
this
more than 60 million people rely on the
yina for their water supply including
the residents of PTI paty Village near
Agra it's a relatively wealthy community
but a few years ago people here started
getting sick so this is the filter that
the government came to install yes yes
what's the problem with it so no it is
not working now it asked for service in
uh twice in a year but since last 5
years it is not serviced at
all not for a single time only so the
water comes out out of the ground yeah
and it's pumped into here which is
supposed to clean it stored into that uh
tank and then it comes to that
filter but this thing doesn't clean
anymore no no no this is not cleaned
anymore and so the water comes out of
this this is the this is the only outlet
for that uh filtered water but uh now as
you know it is a simple water only a
normal water so what happens to people
who drink that water uh peoples are
having many problems like pains in their
joints and they are not able to moved
not able to walk properly and do the
villagers know that the water they're
drinking yeah they know but uh there is
no other option to live if they have to
survive then they will have to drink
this
water fore
spee
for nearby in the city of Agra local
activist Bridge CLE wall is fighting to
rescue the river at its most famous
point when this building was constructed
here one of the major reasons was the
river which the mugal thought was a much
better River than the one in heaven
because of the water
quality what did it look like back then
oh it was in fact Babar himself had
written the water of the river it was as
good as nectar but today it's so
[Music]
[Applause]
scary the utarak high court has ruled in
a judgment that both ganga and Yuma the
holiest of Indian Rivers they are living
entities and from the Judgment also
follows that the river has some basic
human rights how can the human rights of
a river really be enforced if it is a
living entity as the utan high court
says then every living entity has basic
human rights but the number of people
killing this River must number in the
millions everyone who openly defecates
on its banks is in a small way
responsible for its murder that is true
but we have agency which are supposed to
regulate antisocial
activities politics has so far failed to
clean the Amer in Agra residents are
looking elsewhere for
help one evening they held a prayer
ceremony on the River Bank to bless
bricks they hope might one day be used
in a barrage that would raise water
levels in the city we took the
initiative of inviting everybody who was
concerned with the river to the river
bank and initiate action by by doing hav
and Puja of stones which we will place
eventually when the foundation is led by
the
[Music]
government the action has to continue we
will go to the cjm court and people who
are responsible for the death of a river
they have to be
punished